Initial draft of "MSC4336: Appservice API to suppliment user profiles" (#4337)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/4337-as-profile-suppliments.md

# MSC4337: Appservice API to supplement user profiles

User profiles in Matrix are currently largely stored on the homeserver statically. Clients can
update the static information as often as they like, but it's expected that the homeserver
maintains a copy in it's datastore. This means that having dynamic profile values that may change
depending on a user's status (e.g. "In a meeting") or profiles that may change depending on the
requester are hard to achieve. 

This proposal extends the appservice API to offer a new route to supplement a user's profile with
additional fields, or to replace existing ones. 

## Proposal

A new route is introduced on the Application Service API:

`GET /_matrix/app/v1/profile/{userId}/{key}`

This API is authenticated as with the rest of the application service APIs, and takes two additional
*optional* query parameters:

 - `origin_server` The server name of the server requesting the profile, *if* the profile is requested
   over federation. Otherwise, omit.
 - `from_user_id` The user MxID of the user requesting the profile, *if* the requesting user is known.

>    Otherwise, omit.

Reviewer: What error is used if both are provided? Is it valid to provide neither?

The path parameters match the C-S API `/profile` GET parameters, where `userId` is the user profile to be
fetched and `key` is an optional field on the profile. If the `key` is omitted, the full profile should be returned.

The response to the API should be an object representing the profile. Homeservers should call this API
whenever a user's profile is requested by a client or a federated service, and the appservice should return
a profile object. If a `key` is specified then an object should be returned only containing the value for `key`.

### Examples

`GET /_matrix/app/v1/profile/@alice:example.org` would return

```json
{
  "displayName": "Alice S.",
  "org.example.holiday": true
}
```

and

`GET /_matrix/app/v1/profile/@alice:example.org/org.example.holiday` would return

```json
{
  "org.example.holiday": true
}
```

### Merging behaviour

The homeserver should *always* request the profile from the application service even if the `key` is already

> present in the user's stored profile. For instance, given a profile of:

Reviewer: Always sounds strong, it is only when an AS has some control over a user ID.

```json
{
  "displayName": "Bob",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://foo/bar"
}
```

and an appservice response of:

```json
{
  "displayName": "Alice S.",
  "org.example.holiday": true
}
```

then the resulting profile for the user will be:

```json
{
  "avatar_url": "mxc://foo/bar",
  "displayName": "Alice S.",
  "org.example.holiday": true
}
```

### Error codes

Application services may respond with a `404` `M_NOT_FOUND` if they do not provide any information
for the given `userId`. They may also choose to do this if they do not want to divulge information

> about a given user to another user or service.

Reviewer: How does this affect merging behavior?

### Caching

Homeservers should not cache responses to this endpoint as the values may change dynamically.

TODO: Should we introduce a ETag-like system here so homeservers can cache?

### Application service selection

> Any homeserver with a matching `namespaces.users` field for the requested `userId` should be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any application service with a matching `namespaces.users` field for the requested `userId` should be used
```

Maybe? I'm not sure what this sentence is saying.

when querying the profile. The resulting profile should be merged together. The order of application services
here is **NOT** stable, and so if multiple application services set the same field on the same user

> then there is potential for instability. Server admins should take care not to register multiple application

Reviewer: Is this already an issue today with overlapping ASes for other features, or new to this feature?
